---
title: "Optimizing Vaccine Allocation to Combat the COVID-19 Pandemic"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-12-20-top
excerpt: 'Paper leveraging Optimal Classification Trees (D. Bertsimas and J. Dunn, 2017) and K-NN Optimal Imputation (D. Bertsimas, C. Pawlowski and Y.D. Zhuo, 2018) methods on a dataset with EHR information and 1.2M+ rows in Julia and Python to predict mortality and morbidity for trauma patients with 0.93 and 0.77 AUC'
date: 2020-12-20
venue: 'ArXiV (under review)'
paperurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/paper3.pdf'
citation: 'D. Bertsimas et al. (2020), Trauma Outcome Predictor, 34th Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma Annual Scientific Assembly'
---
The outbreak of COVID-19 has spurred extensive research worldwide to develop a vaccine. However, when a vaccine becomes available, limited production and distribution capabilities will likely lead to another challenge: who to prioritize for vaccination to mitigate the near-end impact of the pandemic? To tackle that question, this paper first expands a state-of-the-art epidemiological model, called DELPHI, to capture the effects of vaccinations and the variability in mortality rates across subpopulations. It then integrates this predictive model into a prescriptive model to optimize vaccine allocation, formulated as a bilinear non-convex program. To solve this model, this paper proposes a coordinate descent algorithm that iterates between optimizing vaccine allocations and simulating the dynamics of the pandemic. We implement the model and algorithm using real-world data in the United States. All else equal, the optimized vaccine allocation prioritizes states with a large number of projected cases and subpopulations facing higher risks (e.g., older ones). Ultimately, the optimized vaccine allocation can reduce the death toll of the pandemic by an estimated 10-25%, or 10,000-20,000 deaths over a three-month period in the United States alone.

[(Paper)](http://academicpages.github.io/files/paper3.pdf)

Recommended citation: D. Bertsimas et al. (2020), Trauma Outcome Predictor, 34th Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma Annual Scientific Assembly
